Course Syllabus for "PHIL304: Existentialism "
----------------------------------------------

Existentialism is a philosophical and literary movement that first was
popularized in France soon after World War II by figures such as
Jean-Paul Sartre and Albert Camus. The roots of this movement can be
traced back to the religious writings of Blaise Pascal in the
seventeenth century and those of Søren Kierkegaard in the nineteenth
century. The common thread that unites existentialists is a focus on
existence, particularly the concrete existence of individual human
beings. Unlike rationalist thinkers such as René Descartes and G.W. F.
Hegel, existentialists reject the premise that human beings are
primarily rational creatures who live in an ordered, well-designed
universe. They also do not believe that the answers to life’s challenges
can be solved through thoughtful consideration and reasoned
deliberation. Instead, existentialists view human beings as creatures
whose reason is subordinate to human passions and anxieties, and who
exist in an irrational, absurd, and insignificant universe. In such a
universe, existentialists argue, one struggles to become the best person
one can be given one’s religious, historical, cultural, economic, and
personal circumstances. Existentialists emphasize the human being’s
place in a complex set of circumstances in order to highlight the
uniqueness and individuality within each of us. They stress the role of
the human body in all of our acts and decisions, arguing that the mind
cannot exist without the body (in contrast to the majority of
rationalists, who assert that the mind is separate from the body). In
addition, existentialists consider whether absolute individual freedom
is possible; and if so, what the consequences of such freedom might be
for our sense of responsibility to ourselves, to others, and to God.
They also consider the consequences of the existence or nonexistence of
God, and what either possibility means for our sense of freedom and
responsibility. More than anything, existentialists reflect on human
beings’ anxiety over and dread of death, and consider the consequences
to our individual lives of coming to terms with the inevitability of
death. In this course, you will explore the major figures and works of
the existentialist movement from a historical perspective. You will
study, in sequence, the works of Blaise Pascal, Søren Kierkegaard,
Fyodor Dostoevsky, Friedrich Nietzsche, Martin Heidegger, Jean-Paul
Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir, and Albert Camus. Successful completion of
the course means that you will be able to identify, analyze, and
distinguish among the major themes and figures in the history of
existentialism. Most importantly, you will be able to recognize the
contributions existentialist thinkers have made to our contemporary
understanding of human existence and humanity’s place in the cosmos.

### Learning Outcomes

Upon successful completion of this course, you will be able to:

-   Define the term *existentialism*;
-   Name the key philosophical figures who have played a role in the
    history of existentialism;
-   Explain the basic themes of existentialist thought;
-   Distinguish the various approaches taken toward basic themes in
    existentialist philosophy as they are argued by different key
    figures within the movement;
-   Compare and contrast common existentialist themes as they have been
    treated by different key figures within the movement;
-   Summarize the unique contributions made to existentialist philosophy
    by each of the key figures within the movement; and
-   Identify the contributions of existentialism – particularly the
    works of French philosopher Simone de Beauvoir – to the history of
    feminist thought. 

### Course Requirements

In order to take this course you must:  
    
 √    Have access to a computer.  
  
 √    Have continuous broadband Internet access.  
  
 √    Have the ability and/or permission to install plug-ins or software
(e.g., Adobe Reader or Flash).  
  
 √    Have the ability to download and save files and documents to a
computer.  
  
 √    Have the ability to open Microsoft Office files and documents
(.doc, .docx, .ppt, .xls, etc.).  
  
 √    Be competent in the English language.  
  
 √    Have read the [Saylor Student
Handbook](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Saylor-StudentHandbook.pdf).

### Course Information

Welcome to PHIL304. General information about this course and its
requirements can be found below.  
    
 **Course Designer: **Carlos A. Sanchez, [Professor Nicholaos
Jones](http://www.saylor.org/faculty-h-n/#ProfessorNicholaosJones)  
    
 **Primary Resources:** This course draws on a range of different free,
online educational materials, with primary use of the following
materials:  

-   Stanford University, Center for the Study of Language and
    Information: [*The Stanford Encyclopedia of
    Philosophy*](http://plato.stanford.edu/) (Edward N. Zalta, Principal
    Editor)
-   David Edmonds and Nigel Warburton’s [*Philosophy
    Bites*](http://philosophybites.com/)
-   Mark Linsenmayer et al.’s [*The Partially Examined Life: A
    Philosophy Podcast and Blog*](http://www.partiallyexaminedlife.com/)
-   [The Internet Archive](http://archive.org/)

**Requirements for Completion:** In order to successfully complete this
course, you will need to work through each unit and all of its assigned
materials, including readings, lectures, and web media assignments. In
addition, you also will need to complete and pass the Final Exam.  
    
 Please note that you will receive an official grade only on your Final
Exam. However, in order to adequately prepare for this exam, you will
need to complete and review all the materials in this course.  
    
 In order to pass this course, you will need to earn a 70% or higher on
the Final Exam. Your score on the exam will be tabulated as soon as you
complete it.  If you do not pass the exam, you may take it again.  
    
 **Time Commitment:** This course should take you a total of
approximately **116.5 hours** to complete. Each unit includes a time
advisory that lists the amount of time you are expected to spend on the
unit overall, as well as time advisories for each subunit and individual
assignment. It may be useful to take a look at these time advisories and
determine how much time you have over the next few weeks to complete
each unit, and then set goals for yourself. For example, unit 1 should
take you approximately 8.25 hours to complete. Perhaps you can sit down
with your calendar and decide to complete subunits 1.1 and 1.2
(estimated at 3 hours) on Monday night; subunit 1.3 (estimated at 3.25
hours) on Tuesday night; subunit 1.4 (estimated at 2 hours) on Wednesday
night, etc.  
    
 **Tips/Suggestions:** Some of the materials and assignments included in
this course cover complex ideas and dense, comprehensive texts requiring
that you build and synthesize concepts. Carefully read each assigned
text, taking notes as you go and pausing to review concepts when
necessary. Similarly, you may want to pause assigned lectures to ensure
that you understand the ideas presented. If you find yourself struggling
to understand any of the materials in this course, you may find it
useful to re-read certain texts or take time to review your notes from
previous units as you progress through new material. Your course notes
also will serve as a useful tool for review as you study for your Final
Exam.  
    
 Because the approach of this course is historical, you will find that
some of the most important concepts – for instance, the concept of
existence itself – have evolved with the passage of time. Reviewing your
notes from previous units will be extremely helpful in such cases. You
may also find it useful to explore further some of the primary resources
used in this course, such as *The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy*.  
    

